Atomic Types Challenge (#82)
model-checking/verify-rust-std: doc/src/challenges/0007-atomic-types.md

# Challenge 7: Safety of Methods for Atomic Types & Atomic Intrinsics

- **Status:** Open
- **Tracking Issue:** [#83](https://github.com/model-checking/verify-rust-std/issues/83)
- **Start date:** *2024-09-19*
- **End date:** *2024-12-10*

-------------------

## Goal

(Throughout this challenge, when we say "safe", it is identical to saying "does not exhibit undefined behavior").

`core::sync::atomic` provides methods that operate on atomic types.
For example, `atomic_store(dst: *mut T, val: T, order: Ordering)` stores `val` at the memory location pointed to by `dst` according to the specified [atomic memory ordering](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/atomic/enum.Ordering.html).
Rust developers can use these methods to ensure that their concurrent code is thread-safe.

The goal of this challenge is to verify that these methods (and the intrinsincs they invoke) are safe.

### Success Criteria

> #### Part 1: `from_ptr` Method for Atomic Types

Author: I assume you mean that you wanted to change the header to just be "Unsafe Methods" -- I've done that for now, but lmk if I misinterpreted.

For example, `AtomicI8::from_ptr` is defined as:
```rust
/// `ptr` must be [valid] ... (comment continues; omitted for brevity)
pub const unsafe fn from_ptr<'a>(ptr: *mut i8) -> &'a AtomicI8 {
    // SAFETY: guaranteed by the caller
    unsafe { &*ptr.cast() }
}
```

To verify this method, first encode the safety comments (e.g., about pointer validity) as preconditions, then verify the absence of undefined behavior for all possible `i8` values.

For the `AtomicPtr` case only, we do not require that you verify safety for all possible values for the type pointed to.
Concretely, below is the type signature for `AtomicPtr::from_ptr`:

```rust
pub const unsafe fn from_ptr<'a>(ptr: *mut *mut T) -> &'a AtomicPtr<T>
```

The type pointed to is a `*mut T`.
Verify that for any arbitrary value for this `*mut T` (i.e., any arbitrary memory address), the method is safe.
However, you need not verify the method for all possible instantiations of `T`.
It suffices to verify this method for `T` of byte sizes 0, 1, 2, 4, and at least one non-power of two.

> #### Part 2: Unsafe Atomic Functions

Author: And/0r are you asking that that this part:

> Also write contracts enforcing that the functions are not invoked with `order`s that would cause them to panic.

Be changed so that the contracts are on the safe abstractions (the methods) instead of the unsafe methods?

> #### Part 2: Unsafe Atomic Functions

Author: For now, I added a new section called "Safe Abstractions" that changes the contracts about panicking to be on the safe methods. LMK if I misinterpreted.

> #### Part 2: Unsafe Atomic Functions

Reviewer: Sorry, I'll try to be more specific next time. I was adding the comment while waiting to board my flight. ☺️

I meant that this section is named unsafe functions, but the target functions are in fact safe. Instead, this is about verifying the usage of unsafe inside the safe function. Safe functions that invoke unsafe are known as safe abstractions. Let me know if that makes sense

> #### Part 2: Unsafe Atomic Functions

Author: Makes sense. Made some changes.

| And                   | `atomic_and_relaxed`, `atomic_and_acquire`, `atomic_and_release`, `atomic_and_acqrel`, `atomic_and_seqcst` |
| Nand                  | `atomic_nand_relaxed`, `atomic_nand_acquire`, `atomic_nand_release`, `atomic_nand_acqrel`, `atomic_nand_seqcst` |
| Or                    | `atomic_or_seqcst`, `atomic_or_acquire`, `atomic_or_release`, `atomic_or_acqrel`, `atomic_or_relaxed` |
| Xor                   | `atomic_xor_seqcst`, `atomic_xor_acquire`, `atomic_xor_release`, `atomic_xor_acqrel`, `atomic_xor_relaxed` |
| Max                   | `atomic_max_relaxed`, `atomic_max_acquire`, `atomic_max_release`, `atomic_max_acqrel`, `atomic_max_seqcst` |
| Min                   | `atomic_min_relaxed`, `atomic_min_acquire`, `atomic_min_release`, `atomic_min_acqrel`, `atomic_min_seqcst` |
| Umax                  | `atomic_umax_relaxed`, `atomic_umax_acquire`, `atomic_umax_release`, `atomic_umax_acqrel`, `atomic_umax_seqcst` |
| Umin                  | `atomic_umin_relaxed`, `atomic_umin_acquire`, `atomic_umin_release`, `atomic_umin_acqrel`, `atomic_umin_seqcst` |

## List of UBs

> In addition to any properties called out as SAFETY comments in the source code, all proofs must automatically ensure the absence of the following [undefined behaviors](https://github.com/rust-lang/reference/blob/142b2ed77d33f37a9973772bd95e6144ed9dce43/src/behavior-considered-undefined.md):

Reviewer: Instead of comments in the code, I would say API documentation.

# Challenge 7: Safety of Methods for Atomic Types & Atomic Intrinsics

- **Status:** Open
- **Tracking Issue:** [#83](https://github.com/model-checking/verify-rust-std/issues/83)

> - **Start date:** *2024-09-19*

Reviewer 2: Let's update the date.

# Challenge 7: Safety of Methods for Atomic Types and `ReentrantLock`

- **Status:** Open
- **Tracking Issue:** [#83](https://github.com/model-checking/verify-rust-std/issues/83)
- **Start date:** *2024-09-09*
- **End date:** *2024-12-10*

-------------------

## Goal

> Verify the safety of:

Reviewer 3: We might lack consistency here, but I am not sure that "safety" is unambiguously defined, let alone that all potential readers know what we mean by it? With "absence of undefined behavior" that would be something that one can search for with the help of their favorite search engine, but "safety" alone won't turn up useful hits.

Author: I use "safety" interchangeably with "no undefined behavior"--"safety" is just a more concise way to say it.
However, I realized after reading your comment that this definition comes from the [interactive book](https://rust-book.cs.brown.edu/ch04-01-what-is-ownership.html?) I used to learn Rust, and that the official book does not state that equivalence. So, it's probably unreasonable to expect that everyone else has the same definition as I do. I'll add a sentence at the top stating this assumption so that I can say "safety" throughout and keep the meaning clear.

- The methods for atomic types in `core::sync::atomic` 
- The implementation of `ReentrantLock` in `std::sync::reentrant_lock`

### Success Criteria

> #### Part 1: Atomic Types

Reviewer 3: Can you insert a sentence that explains why there are two parts here? At this point I was wondering whether this could equally be two separate challenges. Only later on you clarify that `ReentrantLock` relies on atomic types. I suggest that you make clear this dependency at this point.

First, verify the safety of methods on atomic types.

Write safety contracts for each of the `from_ptr` methods:

- `AtomicBool::from_ptr`
- `AtomicPtr::from_ptr`
- `AtomicI8::from_ptr`
- `AtomicU8::from_ptr`
- `AtomicI16::from_ptr`
- `AtomicU16::from_ptr`
- `AtomicI32::from_ptr`
- `AtomicU32::from_ptr`
- `AtomicI64::from_ptr`
- `AtomicU64::from_ptr`
- `AtomicI128::from_ptr`
- `AtomicU128::from_ptr`

> Specifically, encode the safety conditions marked `#Safety` in the comments above the methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifically, encode the preconditions that must hold for conditions marked `#Safety` in the comments above the methods to hold.
```

> For the integer and boolean atomics, verify that these contracts hold on all bit-valid values. For `AtomicPtr`, verify that the contracts hold for pointees of size 0, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, and at least one non-power-of-two.

Reviewer 3: What exactly is a "bit-valid" value?

Reviewer 3: When you refer to "size," what's the unit of measurement? Bytes? Bits?

Author: I expanded this text with some examples; hopefully it's clearer now.

Then, write and verify safety contracts for the remaining unsafe functions:

> - `atomic_store`

Reviewer: Which functions are these? Are these meant to be the methods in the atomic types? Or are these the intrinsics themselves?

Author: This atomics file is a bit funky because there's three layers of function calls here:

- The methods for the atomic types, which invoke helper functions at the bottom of the file whenever they want to perform atomic operations
- Helper functions that invoke atomic intrinsics
- The atomic intrinsics themselves

For example, `AtomicI8::fetch_add` and `AtomicI8::fetch_byte_add` are wrappers around the helper function `atomic_add`, which in turn is a wrapper around `intrinsics::atomic_xadd_relaxed`.

So the question is: which layer should have contracts? I chose the helper functions for this challenge, since the method calls are just wrappers around the helpers and Kani doesn't support contracts on intrinsics. 

I don't feel too strongly about this choice, though, especially since we're remaining tool-agnostic (and planning to add contracts support for intrinsics anyway). So I can change the challenge to add contracts for a different layer (or multiple layers) if we'd prefer.

Author: Upon reflection, I decided to change the contracts to be on the methods, since in the future the methods may not use the helpers, and we want to ensure that the contracts continue to hold even as the standard library changes.

- `atomic_load`
- `atomic_swap`
- `atomic_add`
- `atomic_sub`
- `atomic_compare_exchange`
- `atomic_compare_exchange_weak`
- `atomic_and`
- `atomic_nand`
- `atomic_or`
- `atomic_xor`
- `atomic_max`
- `atomic_umax`
- `atomic_umin`

> These functions are wrappers around compiler intrinsics. Thus, your task is to ensure that we cannot cause undefined behavior by invoking the intrinsics on these inputs. For instance, if the intrinsic takes as input a raw pointer and reads the value at that pointer, your contracts should ensure that we would not cause UB by performing the read. For the purpose of this challenge, you may assume that any UB in the intrinsics would be a direct consequence of malformed inputs.

Reviewer: Maybe this challenge should include writing contracts for those intrinsics and ensuring that the contracts are not violated by these methods.

Author: See [comment](https://github.com/model-checking/verify-rust-std/pull/82#discussion_r1759576178).

Reviewer: The methods are safe though.

Author: Sure, but we still want to verify unsafe code inside safe functions, no?

You are not required to write correctness contracts for these functions (e.g., that `atomic_sub` correctly subtracts the operands and stores the result), but it would be great to do so!

#### Part 2: Reentrant Lock

Verify that the `ReentrantLock` implementation in `std::sync::reentrant_lock` is safe. In particular, verify:

* That all uses of the methods on atomic types uphold the safety contracts you wrote in Part 1, and

> * No other unsafe code in `ReentrantLock` causes UB or arithmetic overflow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* No other unsafe code in `ReentrantLock` causes undefined behavior or arithmetic overflow.
```

## List of UBs

In addition to any properties called out as SAFETY comments in the source code, all proofs must automatically ensure the absence of the following [undefined behaviors](https://github.com/rust-lang/reference/blob/142b2ed77d33f37a9973772bd95e6144ed9dce43/src/behavior-considered-undefined.md):

> * Data races.

Author: Note that adding data races means that we cannot complete this challenge with Kani. I can take this out if we'd prefer to leave data races out of scope for this challenge. Not sure the feasibility of adding a tool later that can reason about this.

Reviewer 3: The underlying CBMC supports concurrency, so perhaps Kani _can_ do it?

* Accessing (loading from or storing to) a place that is dangling or based on a misaligned pointer.
* Reading from uninitialized memory.
* Invoking undefined behavior via compiler intrinsics.
* Producing an invalid value.
* Breaking the aliasing or conversion rules of `UnsafeCell` (defined [here](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cell/struct.UnsafeCell.html)).

Note: All solutions to verification challenges need to satisfy the criteria established in the [challenge book](../general-rules.md) in addition to the ones listed above.

> 

Reviewer 3: Nit pick: those blank lines can safely be removed.
